Inside: • Prison entry searching, page 4
• Faith-based unit, page 5
• Whanau Liaison Workers, page 9
• Wanganui Prison upgrade, page 10
June 2003
Maori staff working to support Maori aspirations
A
 productive hui held last month, at Tapu Te
 Ranga Marae in Wellington, confirmed the
place of an integrated Maori staff network to provide
collective input on the Department’s Maori issues.
Charlie Tawhiao, Treaty Relationships
Manager, says the network will be a valuable way
for staff to actively contribute to the Department’s
Treaty of Waitangi goal of achieving wellness and
well-being for the people.
“It’s about recognising the durable solutions
that Maori staff, working in a Maori way, can
generate to address Maori issues.”
Iwi representatives spoke at the hui and added
weight to the need for Maori staff to work together
to support iwi aspirations of wellness and well-
being.
The network includes key representatives
of about 40 staff from across the Department
and taps into existing Maori staff networks.  It
will provide a forum for Maori staff input on
improving the Department’s performance for
whanau, hapu and iwi.
Charlie said the network’s pepeha, or guiding
statement, is Whakaiti kia pu mau mo te iwi -
which loosely translated means, “maintain
humility to strengthen yourself to serve the
people”.
“Many Maori staff have expressed to me
their desire to do more for Maori people.
There is plenty of positive energy among them
to achieve our guiding statement through the
supportive environment of the network.”
Chief Executive Mark Byers addressed the
hui, endorsing the principle and reasons
behind it.  Corrections’ General Management
Team will give full consideration to the
proposals that arose as outcomes of the hui.
Attendees are now taking feedback from
the hui to their existing Maori staff networks
for discussion and endorsement.  The new
network will be regionally-based, aligned with
the existing Community Probation Service
structure.  cN
Around 40 Corrections staff from Public Prisons Service, Community Probation Service, Psychological Service and Head Office attended the
Department’s first integrated Maori staff network hui.
Reducing Re-offending2
Maori and Pacific Peoples PS staff hui
A
 cultural support network of about 20 Maori and
 Pacific Peoples Psychological Service (PS) staff, Te
Roopu Whanau Maanaki, met recently at a hui in Taupo.
On the agenda were discussion and action points
aimed at supporting roopu members and progressing
cultural values in PS.  The network includes psychologists,
programme facilitators and whanau liaison workers,
based at offices and prison sites across the country.
PS Operations Adviser, Liz Pokia, says the roopu hui is
held twice a year.  A key benefit is sharing national and
local Corrections’ happenings among the network’s
geographically dispersed members.
“We discuss what’s going on culturally within the
Department and invite guest speakers from Head Office
to talk about their work.  We also provide collective
feedback from a cultural point of view on PS and
Department-wide polices.”
Liz explains that the roopu is proactive in helping the
Service’s management team further develop its cultural
outlook.
“Senior Psychological Service managers attended a
three-hour question and answer session.  New
information was shared and good ideas developed.”
Liz adds that a valuable spin-off of the hui was
learning about new members.
“We talk about ‘who’ we are, ‘what’ we represent
and how this fits into our work.
“In the last few hui the roopu has been finding its
feet, setting a vision and a mission statement.  I’m
pleased to report there’s plenty of group enthusiasm to
carry us forward.”
Te Roopu Whanau Maanaki will meet again in
August.  The group also links into Corrections’ first
integrated Maori staff network, which encompasses
staff from all service areas of the Department (see cover
story).  cN
Where we are at:
Improving responsiveness to Maori
O
ne of the four major strategic themes for
the period July 2003 to June 2008 will
centre on improving responsiveness to Maori.
The Treaty of Waitangi Strategic Plan
covering that period continues the emphasis on:
• Partnership - involving strategic and
mutually beneficial arrangements with
Maori
• Effectiveness - quality programmes and
services to Maori
• Responsiveness - building the capability
and capacity of our people and systems so
we can perform well for Maori.
The plan will provide further details on
issues to be covered under these headings and
will be published over the coming months.  It
will include a mixture initiatives entailing a
continuation of some recent projects and
identifying some new areas of endeavour.  At
the same time we want to ensure the plan is
not a straightjacket and will allow for more
development work to be added in, in light of
our experience and what we have learnt from
previous initiatives.  In other words, an
evolutionary, albeit accelerating, approach
where each step we take will hopefully better
inform us of the next steps to be taken.  Equally,
we need to stop doing things that are not doing
as well as we would hope after they have been
given a reasonable period to be properly
implemented and tested.  Some of the things
that will continue on are:
• Cultural Supervision pilot
• Cultural Assessment pilot
• Kaiwhakamana initiative.
While some of the new areas will include:
• Development of whanau involvement plan
• Pilot for a Tikanga programme for women
• A revised Te Reo strategy.
Many of the current and future initiatives
point to developing a greater involvement of the
Maori community in Corrections.  The
relationships we are developing with Maori as
part of the Regional Prisons Development
Project are a case in point.  The inter-service
Regional Management Committees have an
explicit mandate to represent an integrated, ie,
“one” Corrections face in their regions and to
develop effective relationships with iwi and
other local community entities.
The developments brought about by IOMS
and IOM either enable better integration to
occur across the Department or point to a
requirement for an integrated approach to occur
if we are to achieve
our potential
effectiveness.  Consistent with this need has
been the recent hui to promote the aspiration to
bring all our own Maori people together in an
integrated network in order to strengthen our
various efforts to improve our responsiveness to
Maori and give better effect to the Treat of
Waitangi Strategic Plan.  This development will
build on changes made last year to establish the
M-Team and for the Managers of Treaty
Relationships and Cultural Perspectives to be
part of the General Management Team.
I have talked before about wanting us to be
the best Corrections system in the world.  I have
also been clear that to achieve that status the
Department must be effective for Maori in a
number of ways, including reducing re-
offending by Maori.  In accepting a further
period as Chief Executive I intend to continue
to make improving our effectiveness for Maori
a major focus for personal commitment and
support over that time.  cN
Reducing Re-offending 3
Department has new Minister
T
he Department of Corrections has a new
Minister, the Hon. Paul Swain.
As well as Minister of Corrections, Mr
Swain’s portfolios include Transport,
Communications and Information
Technology.  He is also Associate Minister
for Economic Development.
Mr Swain entered Parliament in 1990 as
MP for Eastern Hutt. Since 1996 he has
represented the Rimutaka electorate.
Rimutaka Prison is located in his electorate,
and as the local MP, he already has good first-
hand knowledge of this aspect of the
Department’s operations.  He recently
opened the refurbished kitchen at the prison.
On taking up the portfolio Mr Swain spoke
highly of the Department’s Statement of Intent
for 2003-2004, saying the document provided
an excellent overview for him as a new
Minister.
Prior to entering Parliament, Mr Swain
worked for the Council of Trade Unions
Research Office. He also has experience in
teaching.
Mr Swain takes over from the Hon. Mark
Gosche, who stood down from Cabinet and
resigned his portfolios to allow him to spend
more time caring for his wife, who is unwell.  cN
The Hon. Paul Swain is the new
Minister of Corrections.
Forest Research joint venture steaming ahead
C
orrections Inmate Employment (CIE)
 and  Forest Research’s partnership to
develop “hi-tech” pine trees for the forestry
sector has moved into full swing.
CIE Primary Sector Manager, Scott
Gretton, says the project has progressed well
since August 2002, when CIE and Forest
Research announced their six-year, multi-
million dollar partnership agreement to
develop a new breed of pine tree for the farm
forestry sector.
Ross Bayer from Forest Research says
the aim of the project is to develop a
breed of pine tree that is more suited to
fast growth, high fertility sites and
without some of the naturally
occurring imperfections that are
inherent in pine trees.
“Exactly which aspects we’re
improving and how we’re doing it is a
well-guarded secret,” he says.
Under the agreement CIE raises
cuttings at several prisons around the
country from parent stock provided by
Forest Research.  Cuttings are then
harvested and transported to private
nurseries where they are set in beds,
and sold one year later as planting
stock to forest owners.
Forest Research has been happy
with the project’s progress over the last
eight months, Ross adds.
“CIE has started training staff and
inmates in growing the cuttings and
harvesting them, and will shortly deliver
cuttings to commercial nurseries as part of
the pilot programme.
“We’ve also completed a joint risk
management exercise, helping us identify
future threats and opportunities,” says Ross.
Scott says the agreement works well for
both parties because they complement each
other’s respective strengths.
“Forest Research are experts in tree
technology, and CIE is always looking for
meaningful training opportunities for
inmates.  This venture is labour intensive,
making it ideal for our purposes as we can
train more inmates.
“Forestry is an expanding market sector
and skilled workers are always in demand.
There are plenty of post-release
employment opportunities for inmates who
are involved with the project, which was a
big attraction for us when we formed the
agreement with Forest Research.”    cN
Thousands of pine trees at Tongariro/Rangipo Prison ready to be planted out.
Reducing Re-offending4
New policy to strengthen searching procedures
Northland Region prison site manager appointed
P
ublic Prisons Service (PPS) senior staff
have been visiting New Zealand’s
prisons to explain and discuss the
Department’s new Prison Entry Searching
Policy, prior to its introduction this month.
The policy requires that all entrants to a
prison site are liable to be searched. This
includes staff, managers, statutory visitors
(such as MPs and Parole Board members)
and service providers, as well as family and
friends of inmates.
The requirement will provide protection
to staff and visitors, and is similar to
practice of overseas corrections
jurisdictions such as Australia and England,
says Phil McCarthy, General Manager
Public Prisons Service.
“We have to prevent drugs and other
contraband entering prisons. There are
times when some inmates might pressure
visitors to bring this material to them.
Having a single search policy means no one
group is treated differently.”
Search procedures include vehicle
checkpoints, use of drug dogs, metal
detectors, hand-held scanners and bag
searches.  Entry searching will occur on a
random basis.
“For example, all entrants to a site may
be searched on any given morning or
afternoon.  In its current application, the
policy is similar to the ‘anytime, anywhere’
approach of driver alcohol testing.  What it
establishes is the principle that as an
entrant to a prison site you may be
searched,” Phil explains.
Searches must be performed legally
and correctly.  Entrants to a prison site
have the right to refuse to be searched but
they can be denied entry as a result.
Other measures to keep drugs and
banned material out of prisons include new
perimeter fences at many sites. However,
this can increase the likelihood of visitors
or staff being targeted by inmates to bring
in illegal material.
During 2002 about 5,000 visitors’
vehicles were searched at New Zealand
prisons. This resulted in 80 arrests and the
seizure of drugs, drug paraphernalia and
weapons.   cN
M
ike Hughes is the newly
appointed Site Manager for
the Northland Region Corrections
Facility.
Mike will lead the commissioning
process for the new facility, which is
currently under construction, until
its expected opening in March 2005.
This includes having the facility
ready and able to handle systems,
staff and inmates when it opens.
After that time his role will turn to
managing the prison.
A key element of Mike’s position
involves working closely with the
Ngati Rangi hapu, local iwi and the
Northland community.  Ngati Rangi
are Kaitiaki mo nga taonga katoa -
local guardians of all treasured
things and people.
Mike and construction company
Mainzeal were recently welcomed
to Northland at a powhiri at
Ngawha Marae.
“I appreciate the importance and
cultural significance of the powhiri.
In accepting the challenge ahead I
am very much aware of the trust
and responsibility being place in me
by Ngati Rangi,” says Mike.
Mike joins Corrections after 18
months with Australasian
Correctional Management, where he
was involved in both project
management and operational roles.
He has also worked as a senior
adviser on an international project
team for the development of a new
3,000-bed prison in South Africa,
and project managed a new
immigration detention facility in
South Australia.
Prior to those roles, Mike’s
resumé includes time with
accounting firm KPMG as a business
consultant, and a 20-year career in
the New Zealand Army that
culminated in commanding the
Officer Cadet School and an
infantry battalion.  cN
Construction Manager Duncan Kenderdine (left) shows Site Manager Mike Hughes some of
the foundations being laid for the 350-bed Northland Region Corrections Facility.
Reducing Re-offending 5
Faith-based unit planned for Rimutaka Prison
T
he Department’s General
Management Team
has approved the
establishment of a 60-bed
faith-based unit at Rimutaka
Prison, expected to open in
October.
The unit will provide a
therapeutic community
environment characterised
by Bible-oriented programmes,
a prayer-centred daily
routine, regular spiritual
“retreats” and twice-weekly
worship involving a variety
of church groups. Inmates
will continue to take part in
the prison’s rehabilitation
programmes, education and
employment activities.
Phil McCarthy, General
Manager Public Prisons
Service, says that chaplaincy
services have always been offered in prisons, but the unit is a first.
“The unit occupies a similar place in our spectrum of
interventions to the Department’s Maori Focus Units. The faith-
based unit aims to address inmates’ spiritual needs, just as
Maori Focus Units address Maori inmates’ cultural needs.
“Staff will need to be comfortable with, and supportive of,
the unit’s ethos, and volunteer to work within the unit,” Phil
says.
Inmates’ residence in the unit will be voluntary. Preference
will be given to inmates at high risk of re-offending and
motivated to address their offending behaviour. Of these,
priority will be given to inmates reaching the end of longer
(more than 18 months) sentences.
Prison Fellowship New Zealand will be responsible for
developing and implementing Christian programmes within the
unit. The Fellowship acts as a resource to the church and
community by promoting Christian ministry to current and
previous inmates, their families and victims.
Kim Workman, the organisation’s national director, says that
evidence in favour of faith-based interventions is strong, with
numerous successful examples in prisons abroad.
A study trip to USA prisons last year convinced Kim that
such initiatives can work. Prisons in Iowa and Texas with
“Inner-Change” faith-based units are achieving good results, he
says, with low rates of re-offending by former inmates.
“These facilities provide an option for inmates wanting to
address their offending and explore their spirituality,” says Mr
Workman.
“A key feature is that inmates are required to come to terms with
the consequences of their crime and lifestyle on victims, family,
friends and the wider community. They are challenged to restore key
relationships and come to terms with the harm they have caused
others. That in turn motivates them to address the behaviour which
triggers offending, such as violence, drug and alcohol abuse.”
Permission has also been granted for a faith-based inmate
reintegration programme, Operation Jericho, for the Wellington
prisons region, to work in tandem with the unit.
“We believe Operation Jericho addresses a gap in present
reintegrative strategies, in that it provides intensive and ongoing pre
and post-release support,” says Mr Workman.
Operation Jericho complements the Department’s reintegrative
programmes.  Trained volunteer mentors from local church groups
will be assigned to an inmate before release, and will help ensure the
offender’s spiritual wellbeing is catered for once released.
Mr Workman says the whole project has been developed in
partnership with the Department.
“Prison Fellowship sees this as the start of an enduring
partnership between a government agency and a community
provider.”
The developments are a two-year pilot scheme, and if successful
may be offered nationwide. Long term evaluation will be carried out
by the Department’s Policy Development group.  cN
Inside the chapel at Corrections’ first faith-based unit, due to open at Rimutaka Prison in October.
Reducing Re-offending6
Health and safety in action
New facilities in Innovate NZ Awards
T
wo Mt Eden Prison corrections officers,
Phil Nicoll and Paul Young, have learnt
first-hand the value of the Department’s health
and safety programme.
The Department is committed to health and
safety management and performance.  As part
of the ACC partnership programme, the
Department ensures employees injured at work
receive enhanced medical care over the
ACC entitlement. Active rehabilitation
is an important component of this commitment.
Health and Safety Manager Gordon Tait
says like any workplace, the prison
environment might result in injuries, with one
hazard being the sometimes unpredictable
behaviour of inmates.
“Corrections officers are trained to handle
such situations but, for a variety of reasons,
injuries may occur.  When they do, the
Department offers employees support and
rehabilitation.”
A few years ago, Phil Nicoll had his nose
broken by an inmate. His unit manager and the
prison’s human resources team worked
together to ensure that he received the best
possible care.
“They really went the extra mile to help
me return to work on full duties,” says Phil.
Paul Young slipped while at work and
ruptured his Achilles tendon.  CRM
(Corporate Risk Management), the
Department’s rehabilitation provider for work
related injuries, organised for him to have
surgery to correct the injury. CRM and the
Department then arranged ongoing medical
care including having the surgery team
closely monitor Paul’s progress.
“My injury isn’t fully healed yet, but I
told my unit manager that I wanted to get
back to work as soon as I could. My
manager and CRM organised some
alternative duties for me and I’m now back
at work and much happier,” Paul says.
Gordon says these examples show that
medical care is one part of rehabilitation,
with supporting the employee through the
process to return to work being the ultimate
goal.  cN
O
pus International Consultants Ltd has
entered Rimutaka Prison’s new
facilities project in the prestigious Innovate
NZ Awards.
The annual awards are run by ACENZ
(Association of Consulting Engineers New
Zealand) to recognise excellence in
consulting skills, from research through to
construction.
Earlier this year Rimutaka Prison, located
in Upper Hutt, near Wellington, opened three
state of the art accommodation wings, along
with a new kitchen, control room, inmate
receiving area, health
facilities and visits
area.  The integrated
computerised security
system that was installed is
among the most advanced
in Australasia.  Despite
some initial teething
problems the system is
now working well.
Opus was contracted to
the challenging job of
meeting the Department’s
project brief, working
closely with Mainzeal
Construction to fast-track
the new development
within budget.
Opus Architect Tony Nixon says the
project required careful interpretation of the
Department’s needs and the provision of
innovative solutions within a tight timeframe.
“We had to consider a range of factors,
including the life cycle of the buildings and
that they must provide a safe and secure
environment for both staff and inmates.  They
must also allow for Corrections’  inmate
rehabilitation focus.”
The project was of considerable scale,
taking two years to complete.  It
encompassed upgrades to water, sewage and
Work by Opus International Consultants Ltd on Rimutaka Prison’s new facilities has been entered in the Innovate
NZ Awards.
electricity infrastructure across the entire
prison site, all while keeping existing
facilities running.
National Property Manager William
Whewell says the project was marked by
continuous, positive participation between
the Department, consultant and contractor.
“Opus took on board the Department’s
experience in prison construction and the
result was a true partnership effort.”
The 2003 Innovate NZ award winners will
be announced in August.  Information on the
entry can be found at www.acenz.org.nz.  cN
Reducing Re-offending 7
Inmates put pen to paper
L
ocked Down, a recently published anthology of New Zealand prison poetry contains poetry and
 artwork by inmates from three North Island prisons.
The book’s editor, Corrections Officer Mike Subritzky, noticed through his daily contact with
inmates at Waikeria Prison that many of them wrote expressive poetry, often during the prison’s “lock
down” hours.  “Lock down” is the period when an inmate is locked in his or her cell. This is normally
during the night but for security reasons can also be at other times.
The poems in Locked Down were selected from entries to a prison poetry competition open to
inmates from Waikeria, Tongariro/Rangipo and Ohura prisons.  They give the reader an overview of
life in a New Zealand prison and a
MY DADDY
Was my daddy really dangerous
Or was it just his dangerous talk
‘Cause to me he’s just my daddy
Staunch and true in his own walk.
My daddy loved me heaps
And just to crush his pride
The vultures set out after him
Like great whites at low tide.
They took my daddy away
Those fellows dressed in blue
I cried for them to bring him back
What else could I do?
I love my daddy with all my heart
But they put him back inside
Just for trying to pursue
The things he was denied.
My mummy still loves daddy
‘Cause I still hear her cry at night
I just wish my dad was here with us
And everything was alright.
I lay awake some nights
Thinking of the times we’ve had
Just the three of us together
Me, my mum and dad.
Then loneliness starts rolling in
And so too does the tears
I just miss my daddy’s hugs and kisses
They showed me that he cares
I’m only three years old
How stupid could he be
Didn’t he think that he’d get caught
Did he stop to think of me?
I’m getting used to being alone
Though it still feels pretty strange.
JOK
A poem from Locked Down, an anthology of
prison poetry.
Some of the inmate
drawings featured
among the prison
poetry collection in
Locked Down.
chance to see life from an inmate’s
perspective.
The inmates wrote about their
feelings and thoughts on being
inside, about the families they
miss and about their crimes.
Mike was pleased with the
quality of work submitted for the
poetry competition.
“Some of the work touches
your heart and some of it makes
you smile,” says Mike.  He adds
that the book gave the inmates
involved an opportunity to do
something positive during their
sentence, as well as a chance to
see their work in print.
Mike says many inmates are
also very artistic and he has used
about 12 inmate illustrations in
Locked Down.
The book is on sale
for $15 and all profits go
to Victim Support.  To
purchase a copy call
Graham Dallas, Unit
Manager, Waikeria
Prison on 07 871 1416.
cN
Reducing Re-offending8
An alternative approach to the indigenous offender
A
 major issue facing corrections
 jurisdictions worldwide is how best
to respond to the needs of indigenous
offenders and reduce the likelihood they
re-offend.  A recent Canadian article
1
reports on the experience of implementing
“healing lodges” for Canadian indigenous
offenders.
There are currently six healing lodges
in Canada, two of these being managed by
Canada’s Correctional Service, and the
remainder managed by indigenous
agencies or communities.
While the size and structure of these
facilities varies, both staff and residents
comment favourably on their experiences
in them.  The overwhelming majority of
residents report a high degree of
satisfaction with the healing lodge
experience, indicating that it helped them
in understanding themselves.  It was also
noted that the offenders were less angry
and more in control of their emotions.
Viewed as an important part of the
healing lodge experience was access to
elders, cultural activities, going to activities
outside the lodge, and the availability of a
traditional native American Indian practice -
sweat lodges.  Significantly, almost all of the
offenders indicated their experience and
interaction with staff was positive.
The healing lodge environment,
providing access to elders or spiritual
advisers, as well as a range of cultural
activities, enhanced residents’ awareness of
their culture.  This experience seems to have
had a positive impact on those who
previously were ambivalent about their
culture or traditions before entering the
lodge.  Once the offenders had the
opportunity to learn more about their
culture, it enhanced how they viewed
themselves and others, as well as positively
impacting on their behaviour.
The impact of the lodge experience also
had a bearing on relationships between staff
and residents.  As the staff were
predominantly indigenous, they were felt to
be able to assist in the healing process.  For
their part, the staff demonstrated a
commitment to working with the
offenders and aiding them in their healing.
The authors noted that staff who believe
in what they do created a positive and
accepting environment.
An interesting point made was that
offenders in the lodges had a slightly more
extensive criminal history than indigenous
offenders in the general minimum security
population.  More lodge residents had
previously been segregated for
disciplinary infractions and had tried to
escape more often.  They were rated at a
higher risk of re-offending, with more
needs and lower reintegration potential at
the time of initial reception into prison.
This clearly shows that the positive
healing lodge experience was unlikely to
be the result of specially selecting more
manageable offenders for placement in
these facilities.  cN
1
Crutcher, Nicole and Trevethan, Shelley. ‘An
Examination of Healing Lodges for Federal
Offenders in Canada.’ FORUM on Corrections
Research 14, no. 3 (2002): 52-54.
WHAT’S NEW IN THE LITERATURE
University students give prison top marks
A
 recent tour of Manawatu Prison proved an eye-opener for 55
 Massey University students.
Site Manager Trevor Riddle says that bringing the students into the
prison was a valuable exercise for both the students and the Department.
“We’re helping them with their studies and at the same time taking
the mystery out of prisons by explaining what really goes on behind the
gates.  Hopefully we’ve also tweaked their interest in a Corrections
career.”
After a presentation on the prison’s history and an introduction to
the Department’s work, the students were escorted through the facility.
They were shown cells, visiting areas, programme rooms and inmate
employment activities.
The students visited in two groups.  Community psychology
students learned how the prison, with its unique structure and own set of
rules, is a community within a community.  Rehabilitation studies
students focused on the work done to rehabilitate and prepare offenders
for release.
Senior Lecturer Robert Gregory said the visit left a lasting
impression on his psychology class, triggering their thinking
around society’s role in justice issues.
“Visiting Manawatu Prison was a ‘physical’ experience that
can’t be replaced by reading a textbook.  I appreciate the effort of
Trevor and his team to make the trip as educational as possible.”
Rehabilitation Studies Lecturer Gretchen Good added that her
class was very curious and at times overawed by the prison
atmosphere.
Trevor remarked on the prison’s longstanding relationship
with Massey University, noting that classes have visited almost
every year since 1984.
“Manawatu Prison is a few kilometres from Palmerston North
and not visible from the main road, so it’s easy to overlook that
we’re here.  The university visits are one of the activities we do
each year with local organisations to build awareness of our
work.”  cN
Reducing Re-offending 9
All in a day’s whanau liaison
P
sychological Service’s whanau liaison
workers have a unique role bridging
Maori inmates with their whanau support,
aiming to put offenders in a strong position
to successfully return to the community.
A liaison worker is based at each of the
Department’s five Maori focus units.  The
units operate within prisons, and through
the practice of Tikanga Maori, aim to bring
about positive change in inmates’ thinking
and behaviour.
Director of Psychological Service,
David Riley, says the liaison workers
involve inmates’ whanau in the offenders’
case management and release planning.
“We’re tapping into the great support
resource that whanau can offer.”
Whanau liaison workers have a diverse
role, maintaining relationships with a
variety of  people.
“They work with corrections officers
who are assigned to case-manage offenders,
the probation officer overseeing his parole,
Waikeria Prison’s dairy farms keep pace with the times
C
onstruction is underway to modernise
 Waikeria Prison’s four dairy farms, in one
of the biggest capital projects for Corrections
Inmate Employment (CIE) this year.
The upgrade is expected to increase milk
production by 50 percent says CIE Primary Sector
Manager Scott Gretton.
“A big part of the improvement involves
extending one of the four milking sheds,
increasing farm drainage and improving effluent
irrigation.  Five new feed ‘bunkers’ are being built
and extensions are being made to the existing
maize feeding pads.
Allan Bullick, Waikeria Farm Manager and
project manager for the upgrade, says the
“bunkers” will increase maize storage capacity.
With more feed, the number of cows at the prison’s
farms will rise from 3,300 to 3,600.
“Cows fed extra maize also produce more
milk and the overall result will be an increase in
the milk yield,” he says.
Upgrade planning began in October 2002 and
construction started earlier this year. The new
facilities and improvements are expected to be
operating by the time the new dairy season begins
in June.
Scott explains that the changes were driven by
economic necessity.
Facilities and equipment at Waikeria Prison’s dairy farms are being upgraded.
“The dairy payout has reduced by 30 percent
this year, from $5.70 to $3.70 per kilo of milk
solids.  It is expected to plateau at this level for
some time.  We face the same commercial realities
as the private sector, so must operate more
efficiently to maintain the same level of financial
return.
 “Long gone are the days when prison
industries were there just to keep inmates busy.
Today we teach inmates real skills for real jobs -
and must do so in a commercially viable manner.
“Any surplus from the farming operation goes
straight back into the business to help train
inmates,” concludes Scott.  cN
and link whanau to
Maori and other
agencies that can help
inmates when released.
They also work closely
with the prison’s
cultural adviser.”
After piloting the
position from 1997, the
first whanau liaison
worker officially
started in 2000.  David
says that regular hui
are held to assist the
liaison workers in their
evolving roles.  At
their April hui,
whanau liaison
workers discussed the future direction of
their jobs in the context of current
Department initiatives and the programmes
organised to reintegrate offenders into the
community.
After the hui, the whanau liaison
workers joined in Psychological
Service’s Te Roopu Whanau Maanaki
hui for its Maori and Pacific Peoples
staff (see story on page 2).   cN
The Department’s whanau liaison workers are, from left: John
Maihi, Stewart Heremaia, Makere Riwaka-Love and Steve Hoperi
(not present is Tony Kahura).
Reducing Re-offending10
Improvements in store for Wanganui Prison
Energy savings kick in
W
anganui Prison is the centre of a major
redevelopment to coordinate and
improve inmate facilities and security.  Features
include a new perimeter fence, new buildings and
system upgrades.
In the design and planning stages are a new
health unit, receiving office and visits facility.  All
will be located on the boundary of  the “non-
inmate” and “inmate access” parts of the prison.
This zoning will be established with the new
fence and will allow controlled access by visitors,
staff and suppliers.
“We expect to have contract commitment
towards the end of June,” says Senior Property
Advisor, Crispin Kay.
“The receiving office, which contains a new
central control room, will be one of the first areas
tackled and is currently being designed.
“The health, programmes and visits facilities
will follow.  In the future, plans allow for a
cultural centre, gatehouse, administration
building and new kitchen to be built.  This long-
term planning approach to the upgrades required
across the prison site will produce the best
results.”
An $8 million upgrade of the prison’s
Kaitoke wing accommodation areas also
features.  Cells will be brought up to more
modern standards and the work will include
improvements to ventilation and fire control
systems, plus painting and flooring
improvements.  Cells with two beds will be made
Wanganui Prison’s upgrade plans.
O
ver the past six weeks the Department has stepped up its energy conservation efforts, playing its part towards
national electricity savings. Energy Manager, Cees Ebskamp, says savings so far have been thanks to a great team
effort and Corrections can take pride in its energy efficiency achievements.
Priority has been given to activities in the Department’s Energy Management Strategy, relevant staff have been
encouraged to implement permanent energy-wise solutions, and there have been plenty of reminders to “switch off
when not in use”.
■ Raw data on 80 percent of prison electricity use shows that prisons, which account for the bulk of the Department’s
energy bill, have begun a downward trend in energy use, saving around 7.5 percent to date.  This comes on top of
energy savings already made during the past year, despite accommodating an increasing number of inmates and with
the onset of cooler weather.
■ Many prisons are heated by gas, diesel, coal and wood.  At Waikeria Prison, staff have insulated hot water cylinders
and pipes, and are using cold water for laundry washes.
■ Head Office is using almost 20 percent less energy.  Air conditioning hours were cut back, hot water thermostats
turned down and around 800 fluorescent light-tubes were removed.
All energy efficiency efforts are being put in place without compromising security, service levels or health and safety.  cN
bigger and facilities for inmates with disabilities
will be added.
Improving the prison’s security and systems
infrastructure is a major focus of the project, says
Crispin.
“The Department is putting sustainable issues
high on the agenda, in terms of the resources used
by the site.
“This means that we’re addressing things such
as wise energy use, and planning ahead for utility
needs, such as water supply and sewage removal.”
A 4.5 metre high perimeter fence plus two
outer, delineation fences, will be erected to enclose
the site.  Along with making it more difficult for
inmates to escape, the fencing will help deter
“unwanted visitors”, such as people seeking to
deposit drugs on the property.
Work at Wanganui Prison is part of a wider
maintenance and improvement project being
carried out at many New Zealand prisons, says
Crispin.
“Hawke’s Bay, Christchurch, Christchurch
Women’s and Manawatu prisons are all at various
stages of upgrade planning or completion, and
work at Waikeria Prison will follow at a later
stage.”  cN
Reducing Re-offending 11
Cooking classes teach life skills to young inmates
Prison networks with emergency services
Y
oung offenders in
Rimutaka Prison’s Youth
Unit have been sharpening their
culinary skills through a
practical cooking course that
also reinforces some important
social skills.
“While the young men are
learning to cook healthy meals
they are taking on board some
valuable lessons,” says Miriam
Letoa, Youth Unit Manager.
“They’re taught what food is
best for a young family, as some
of these inmates are fathers too.
Nutrition and budgeting are key
parts of the course, and they
develop their relationship skills
from interacting with others
while they cook.”
The cooking classes are a
first within New Zealand
prison’s four youth units, which accommodate
teenage inmates aged between 16 and 20 years.
Since April, two cooking courses have
been run at Rimutaka Prison’s Youth Unit.  The
classes are run by Robyn Turner of Wellington
PARS (Prisoners’ Aid and Rehabilitation
Society).  Inmates attend five three-hour lessons
held in the early evening. Interest from the
inmates currently exceeds the number of
places available, says Miriam.
“The classes focus on giving the young men
practical skills to take with them when they
leave prison. Being able to provide good,
nutritious meals, whether it’s a soup or salad, is
something many of us take for granted,” Miriam
explains.
“Once the meals are prepared the inmates
sit around the dinner table, share their food and
talk to each other.  This setting is typical of what
many families do every night.
“We’re very proud of the cooking course
because it’s struck a chord with the young
offenders who take part. Cooking is a
constructive activity that will help them
enhance their family relationships, which in
many cases contributed to their offending.
“In fact, the classes are so successful that
other youth units have expressed interest in
running something similar,” concludes
Miriam.  cN
S
uccessfully handling any emergency situation lies in the
planning and preparation beforehand.  With that in mind,
local emergency services turned up to Manawatu Prison last
month to familiarise themselves with the prison’s emergency
response processes.
Representatives from Police, Fire Service, Ambulance, Civil
Defence and the nearby Army camp learned about how the
prison deals with emergencies.  Trained prison staff
demonstrated how they can provide emergency services with
safe access into the prison, for example, to put out a fire or to
treat injured inmates.
Site Manager Trevor Riddle says the session was triggered
by a bomb scare at the prison earlier this year.
“Although it was a false alarm, at the debrief we realised
that emergency services had mixed understanding of our
emergency planning and capabilities.
“Input from these services is an integral part of prison
emergency planning.  We brainstormed how we can work more
closely together and a follow-up meeting has been planned.”
Every prison has a set of detailed emergency plans for
various scenarios, and staff are trained in first aid and how to
manage basic incidents.
“Fortunately, major incidents are rare, but whether it’s an
earthquake, riot or power cut we need to be ready.  Plans include
back-ups for food, medical services and alternative inmate
accommodation,” says Trevor.  cN
Rimutaka Prison’s Youth Unit inmates are learning to cook.
Reducing Re-offending12
Corrections News is the magazine of the
Department of Corrections, New Zealand.
Letters and comments are welcome.
The Editor, Corrections News
Department of Corrections
Private Box 1206, Wellington
Phone (04) 460 3365 Fax (04) 460 3208
Email commdesk@corrections.govt.nz
A new look for intranet
C
hanges are planned next month to the  look of the Department’s
 intranet, CorrNet.  CorrNet is being streamlined in its look
and feel to match the Corrections’ recently redeveloped internet
site.
An obvious difference will be the change in screen colour to
match the Department’s corporate colours.
Aside from the changes to colour, information on the intranet
will be managed differently through new layout and navigation.
“A document on the Department’s internet site provides public
information about Corrections,” says IT Manager Derek Lyons.
“If a slightly different version of the document exists on
CorrNet then there’s potential for misinterpretation. Once our
Content Management project rolls out we’ll be able to ensure that
documents on both CorrNet and the internet have exactly the same
source content.”
Not all CorrNet information will be placed on the Department’s
internet and any information placed on CorrNet will remain secure
to Corrections users only.
IOMS Trust Accounting
improvements
From late June, changes to the Trust Accounting module in
IOMS will give Public Prisons Trust Accounting Clerks improved
reporting capability.  Inmates can operate “trust accounts” while in
prison, managed by the Trust Accounting Clerk, to buy goods such
as telephone cards, clothing and sweets from money deposited by
family or friends, or earned through inmate employment activities.
Seven new reports will be available and eight existing reports
enhanced. Some rarely used reports will be removed from the
“report tree”.
Trust Account Clerks and IOMS Business Coaches are being
updated on all the changes.  cN
Upper Hutt CPS Service Centre opens
C
orrections Under-Secretary Mita Ririnui officially opened Upper Hutt’s new CPS Service
Centre, at a ceremony attended by kaumatua and representatives of Orongomai Marae,
local council representatives, CPS staff and members of the Upper Hutt community.
The centre is part of the Department’s co-location project, in which CPS offices and work
facilities are located under one roof, making dealing with CPS a “one-stop shop”.
CPS staff are delighted with the new facility, which is in Railway Avenue, near to
Orongomai Marae, with whom the centre has a close relationship.  Previously CPS Upper Hutt
had operated from administration offices in Main St and a Community Work building in
Goodshed Road.  cN
Upper Hutt Community Probation Service (CPS) staff celebrate the recent opening of the
city’s new CPS Service Centre.
