Rochester Institute of Technology
Terms and Conditions of Housing
and meal and debit plans
2003-2004
It’s All About OUR Students!
Table of Contents
 
 Advanced housing reservation fee   6
 Alcohol and drug regulations   24
  residence halls    24
  rit inn and apartment    24
 Alternate rent charges for apartments  6
 Apartments      3
  failure to occupy    4
  loss of roommate    4
 Apartment complex occupancy   5
 Apartment maintencance and care   17
  renovation and repair    18
  ceiling tiles in apartments   18
  utilities–apartments    18
  air conditioners in apartments  18
 Assignments      2
 Bedding guidelines in residence halls   23
 Between quarter charges and holiday break  6
 Cancellation/refund     9
  cancellation before fall move–in  9
  cancellation fee after move–in  9 
  refund policy      9
  waived housing reservation fee  9
  prorated refund    9
  partial refund     10
  refund schedule    10
 Carbon monoxide      15
 Check in      8
  room changes     8
 Check out      8
 Colony manor basements    16
 Community expectations    11
 Damage      22
 Eligibility      1
 Fire safety      13
  residence halls and rit inn   15
 Furniture      20
 General      23
 Grill use for residence halls and rit inn  16
 Guest/visitation     13
 Holiday closing     4
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
 Housing guidelines and expectations   11
 Insurance       16
 Introduction      1
 Keys       17
 Liability      21
 No show dates and changes    5
 Parites—apartments     21
 Parking      23
 Pets/service animals     19
 Picnic/grill area in apartments   16
 Pools       23
 Rates       2
 Release      8
 Residence halls/rit inn    2 
  space vacancy      2  
  single room policy    2  
  expanded occupancy    3
 Residence halls terms of meal and debt plans  25
  terms of meals plans    25
  terms of debit plans    26
  terms of straight debit   27
  refund schedule    28
 Resident’s right to terminate    7
 Residency requirement    2
 Resident use and length of contract   1
 RIT Inn terms of meal and debit plans   28
  terms of meal plans    28 
  terms of debit plans    29
  terms of straight debit   30
  refund schedule    31
 RIT’s right of inspection and entry   19
 RIT’s right to terminate    7
 Roommate addition     6
 Smoking regulations     17
 Storage space      21
 Summer assignments     4
 Transfering units     22
 University common     3
  space vacancy     3
 Windows, screens and balconies   20
   
  
   
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Introduction
Welcome to the RIT housing community. This document provides the policies and 
procedures for our community and defines your responsibility as a member of the 
community. By signing a contract and residing in RIT housing you agree to abide by this 
document and all federal, state and local laws (available in RIT’s library) and Institute 
policy (available in the Student’s Rights and Responsibilities booklet).  With proper notice, 
the Institute can modify the terms and conditions during the term of this agreement. These 
terms supersede any and all prior terms and conditions.
 
Eligibility
You must be enrolled as a student (12 credit hours or more) at Rochester Institute of 
Technology, a registered cooperative (co-op) student, a student registered in a field–study 
instruction program, part of a special Institute sponsored program approved by RIT 
Housing Operations, or a spouse, domestic partner or dependent of and living with a 
resident in an RIT apartment meeting one of the criteria above. Matriculated students 
will be given priority to RIT housing. In addition, you must continue to maintain your 
eligibility throughout your contract by preventing/resolving holds placed on your student 
record. This housing contract will be terminated immediately if you do not meet the 
eligibility standards. Notification by the Bursar’s office to RIT Housing Operations of 
indebtedness by a student can result in eviction from housing. Any student leaving for 
withdrawal, leave of absence or academic suspension is expected to check out (see check 
out procedures) of housing within three (3) days of submitting offical paperwork or receipt 
of notice of supension.
Resident Use and Length of Contract 
RIT housing contracts are binding for the entire academic year, September–May or from 
the day you move in until 24 hours after your last exam unless you are graduating. If you 
fail to move out on your move out date, you will be charged $100 a day on your student 
account.  A cancellation fee will be charged for breaking a housing contract that is binding 
for a full academic year. 
Residents are prohibited from living with anyone other than their assigned roommate(s). 
Occupancy of all RIT housing is limited to those students assigned by RIT Housing 
Operations. You may not sublet or loan your housing, space, room or any part of your 
living quarters to anyone else. Residents who knowingly harbor ineligible/illegal residents 
may face judicial action and /or termination of their housing contract. If at any time, the 
resident fails to comply with the terms and conditions of this contract, RIT may terminate 
the contract with appropriate notice. The resident must vacate housing within three 
business days of termination. 
1
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Residency Requirement
First year freshmen students are required by the Institute to live in the residence halls 
for their first academic year. First year freshmen currently assigned to the residence halls 
wishing to commute (live with parent/guardian within a 30 mile radius) must be released 
from their residence hall contract.  A cancellation fee will be charged for breaking a housing 
contract that is binding for a full academic year.
Rates
Refer to the RIT Housing Operation rate sheet for 2003–2004 or check our website at 
finweb.rit.edu/housing.
Assignments
In making assignments to RIT housing, Housing Operations will not honor any requests 
for assignments or room changes which discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, 
national origin, ancestry, disability, or sexual orientation. Whenever possible residents will 
be assigned to their preferred location and/or roommate(s).
Residence Halls and RIT Inn Assignments
RIT Housing Operations does not permit cohabitation in the residence halls or the RIT 
Inn. All deaf/hard of hearing students will be assigned to a fire strobed room.
RIT Housing Operations reserves the right to: 
 Change room or hall assignments.
 Assign roommates together and/or consolidate students.
 Monitor any student’s option to participate in any or all portion(s) of the   
 Housing Selection Process based on registration holds on the student’s record.
Space Vacancy in Room
If you are in a double room assignment, you must keep the unoccupied side of your room 
empty for a new assignment at all times or be subject to judicial action, required to pay the 
double as a single rate and/or be consolidated.
Single Room Policy
Single rooms are assigned based on a point system that honors seniority. For more 
2
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
information contact RIT Housing Operations.  
In Time of Expanded Occupancy
Entering freshmen are guaranteed housing. Space is assigned based on the receipt date of 
your deposit to admissions, therefore on a first come, first served basis. Students who are 
the last to be admitted may be placed in temporary housing (i.e. triples, special interest 
housing, or local hotels).
University Commons Assignments
The four bedrooms in a University Commons unit are assigned as single rooms. The 
kitchen, living room area, and bathrooms are common space shared among the occupants 
of the single rooms. Students will be assigned using the following criteria: gender, smoking 
and non-smoking, age, and major. RIT shall have the sole right to determine all assignments 
to the single rooms within a University Commons unit and reserves the right to change unit 
assignments and/or reassign rooms with good cause.
Space Vacancy
You must keep the unoccupied room(s) within your assigned University Commons unit 
locked, vacant and ready for a new assignment at all times or be subject to judicial follow 
up and/or be consolidated.  In the event that one or more of the single rooms within the 
unit become vacant due to the move out of a student or the failure of a student to take 
occupancy the responsibility for assigning a new student to the vacant room(s) rest with 
the RIT Housing Operations.  Remaining students assigned to the single rooms within the 
unit have no additional financial responsibilities due to vacancies.  
Housing Operations will assign students to the vacant single rooms based on application 
date using the criteria above.  Students currently assigned to the single rooms within the 
unit will be notified by Housing Operations that a student has been assigned to a vacant 
single room within the unit.  The current students in the unit cannot deny access to the 
unit or the vacant single room to a newly assigned student.  If current occupants of the unit 
know a student they would like to move into the vacant single within the unit, that student 
must follow the application process for the single room by seeing an assignment staff 
member in the Housing Operations Office in Grace Watson Hall.  No Roommate Addition 
Forms will be accepted for single rooms within a University Commons unit.
Assignments for Apartments
Colony Manor, Perkins Green, Riverknoll, Racquet Club
Students applying individually will be assigned randomly using the following criteria: 
 
3
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
gender, age, major, smoking and non-smoking. RIT shall have the sole right to determine 
all apartment assignments and reserves the right to change apartment assignments and/or 
reassign spaces with good cause. RIT reserves the right to consolidate apartment assignments 
and to assign a new resident into any unit which falls below required occupancy. Resident 
shall not assign, sublet or transfer his/her assignment rights in the apartment or any part 
thereof.
Loss of Roommate
When a departing resident has filed an End of Quarter Move-Out Notice, remaining 
residents will have until the start of the following quarter to secure a replacement 
roommate(s) before the alternate occupancy rate is applied. Apartment keys must be 
signed out by replacement roommate(s) in order for the rate to be adjusted. See Alternate 
Housing Charges for Apartments section for more information.
Failure to Occupy
In the event a roommate(s) fails to take occupancy, responsibility for securing a new 
roommate(s) shall rest with the remaining residents. Remaining residents will have until 
the start of the following quarter to secure a replacement roommates(s) before the alternate 
occupancy rate is applied. RIT shall not be liable for failure to give any resident possession or 
occupancy of a specific, assigned apartment on the term commencement date. Alternative 
housing will be provided by RIT on the basis of availability until an apartment is available. 
All deaf and hard of hearing students who desire to reside in RIT apartments will be assigned 
a unit specifically equipped with strobed fire and carbon monoxide alarm systems.
Summer Assignments
A summer housing application must be submitted to Housing Operations. Housing is 
available in the residence halls, University Commons and some apartments for summer 
quarter. Double rooms and doubles as singles are offered within the specified summer 
quarter area in the residence halls. Assignments to apartments and the single rooms in 
University Commons are limited. Students who will occupy the apartment/room for fall 
quarter will be given priority. Not all vacant apartments will be assigned during summer 
in order to allow for maintenance and renovation work. All RIT housing is charged on a 
weekly basis for summer quarter. See rate sheets available at Housing Operations or check 
out our website at finweb.rit.edu/housing.   
Holiday Closing and Housing
Residence Halls–On Sunday, December 21, 2003 at 10:00 am the residence halls close for 
4
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
the holiday vacation period. Students must vacate their room and leave the residence halls 
during this time. Departure must be prior to building lock up and no entrance to the 
building will be allowed prior to Sunday, January 4, 2004 at noon. Information regarding 
this break will be distributed to all residents before holiday break. Residence Life staff 
check all student rooms during this break. Alternative housing is available at the RIT Inn 
& Conference Center for students who must stay over the holiday break. Students may 
contact Housing Operations for information regarding alternative housing.
Apartment Complex Occupancy
Colony Manor
 1 Bedroom Lower  1 or 2 people
 1 Bedroom Upper  1 or 2 people
 2 Bedroom   4 people
 2 Bedroom Townhouse  4 people
 3 Bedroom Townhouse  4 people
Perkins Green
 1 Bedroom   1 or 2 people
 2 Bedroom I & II  4 people
Riverknoll
 1 Bedroom   1 or 2 people
 2 Bedroom Townhouse  3 or 4 people
 3 Bedroom Townhouse  4 people
Racquet Club    
 1 Bedroom   1 or 2 people
University Commons Occupancy
 4 single rooms   1 person per room
RIT will not issue contracts to exceed the maximum occupancy of any apartment unit. No 
more than two people may occupy a one-bedroom apartment; no more than four people 
may occupy a two or three bedroom apartment.
No Show Dates and Charge
Your assignment in RIT housing will not be guaranteed if you do not pick up and sign out 
your key from RIT staff by the following dates for the start of each quarter. In addition, 
5
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
failure to sign out your keys by the dates below, will result in a no show penalty of $300 
being placed on your student account.
 
 Fall  September 8, 2003
 Winter  December 1, 2003
 Spring  March 8, 2004.
Roommate Addition
Housing charges for a roommate addition will begin as the date designated on the form 
under the question section “I will need to move in on”.
Advance Housing Reservation Fee
Returning students who secure a space in RIT housing for the 2003–2004 academic year will 
have a $300 housing reservation fee placed on their student account at the time of sign up. 
Non-payment of the housing reservation fee will result in a registration hold. The $300 is 
applied to the fall housing charge. See Cancellation/Refund section for refund information. 
Any student whose housing reservation fee is waived at the time of sign up and then cancels 
after June 15, 2003 will be assessed a $300 cancellation fee.
Alternate Housing Charges for Apartment
If required occupancy is not met by the following dates, the alternate occupancy rate will be 
reflected on your student account.
 Fall    July 14, 2003 
 Winter   September 15, 2003
 Spring   December 8, 2003
Between Quarter Charges and Holiday Break
Housing charges for each quarter only cover periods when RIT is officially in session.  
Students who remain in housing from one quarter to the next will not experience additional 
charges during quarter breaks. Students who stay in their apartment, University Common’s 
room, or RIT Inn room during the holiday break, will not experience additional charges 
for that time. Students who remain in housing during the quarter break period, but do not 
return for the next quarter, will be charged for interim housing. Please see published rates 
for 2003–2004. 
6
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Resident’s Right to Terminate
A resident has the option of terminating this agreement at the end of an RIT academic 
quarter if he/she is not a current freshman that is bound by the Institute’s first year live on 
requirement.  The resident must submit an End of Quarter Move Out Notice to RIT Housing 
Operations. This notice must be delivered at least one month prior to the last daytime class as 
designated on the official Institute calendar. The applicable dates for the 2003-2004 academic 
year follow. If a student terminates to move to non-RIT housing and is still a registered 
student, the cancellation fee will apply. See Cancellation Fee Section.  The exception to the 
application of the cancellation fee is a student leaving for a registered co-op.
Fall 20031 End of Quarter Move-Out Notices must be filed by October 17, 2003.
  Resident will vacate no later than November 22, 2003.
Winter 20032 End of Quarter Move-Out Notices must be filed by January 26, 2004.
  Resident will vacate no later than February 28, 2004.
Failure to submit a move out notification by a student leaving RIT housing by the applicable 
date will result in an improper check–out fee of $50.00.
RIT’s Right to Terminate
If a resident is found to have violated RIT policy or regulation under RIT’s Judicial and 
Disciplinary Policy, RIT may terminate the housing contract prior to expiration of the 
term. The foregoing also applies to all members of the resident’s family residing in the 
apartment.In exceptional circumstances involving dangerous behavior or the potential for 
it to occur, a resident may be asked to leave RIT housing. RIT may terminate the resident’s 
contract prior to its expiration and remove the resident immediately from his/her room in 
the event the resident’s behavior is or has the serious potential for becoming dangerous to 
him/herself or others.
The reasons for terminating a resident’s contract for “endangering behavior” must be set 
forth in writing and approved by the Directors of the Center for Residence Life and RIT 
Housing Operations in consultation with the Assistant to the Vice President for Student 
Conduct and Mediation Services. Once approved, the resident may be required to leave 
RIT housing immediately and, if necessary, may be removed by Campus Safety, even 
though he/she may appeal the decision subsequent to leaving. A resident whose contract 
has been terminated for endangering behavior has ten (10) business days after termination 
to appeal the decision in writing to the Assistant to the Vice President for Student Conduct 
and Medication Services, Student Affairs Office, stating reasons for the appeal and the 
desired resolution. A subsequent appeal to the Institute Hearing and Appeals Board may 
occur under the rules set forth by the RIT Judicial Process. 
7
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Checking Into Housing
Upon moving into your apartment/room each resident shall complete an inspection and sign 
a Move In Inspection form which should be an accurate and complete report of the contents 
and conditions of his/her assigned housing. If the resident has not signed this form within 48 
hours of his/her arrival, he/she waive his/her right to provide input on this form. All residents 
check in with RIT Housing Operations to obtain apartment/room key(s). Residents may not 
accept keys from a roommate.
Room Changes
RIT Housing Operations and the Center for Residence Life regulate the amount of room 
changes that are allowed during any quarter. For more information contact your area 
office.
Checking Out of Housing
Residents must follow the proper check out procedure when vacating housing by 
completing a Move Out Notification form by the appropriate date (see Resident’s Right to 
Terminate section) and by returning keys in a completed Key Return Envelope to an area 
office or designated location. Failure to check out properly will result in an improper check 
out fee of $50.00, which will be placed on the resident’s student account. Checking out of 
hosuing also includes removal of all personal belongings by the designated date on your 
Move Out Notification form. Belongings not removed will be considered abandoned. The 
Institute will dispose of all abandoned items without notice found in the student’s assigned 
housing or elsewhere on the premises after termination of this contract. Resident may be 
charged for removal costs.
RIT shall inspect the apartment/room when resident moves out at the termination of the 
contract and note in the space provided on RIT’s copy of the Move-In Inspection form the 
condition of the apartment/room, including all furnishing and fixtures, and any damage 
done which is deemed by RIT to have arisen during resident’s occupancy of the apartment/
room.  Resident shall be charged for any damage repair costs deemed necessary. Resident 
shall leave the apartment/room in a clean and sanitary condition.
Release
Freshmen with valid reasons may be considered for a release from the Institute’s first 
year live on requirement. A student must be officially released before checking out of the 
residence halls. Contact RIT Housing Operations for information on releases. Freshmen 
students who are not officially released and check out of the residence halls will continue to 
be charged rent for the remainder of the 2003–2004 academic year. Freshmen who move 
 
8
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
to non–RIT housing including parent/guardian’s home and remain a registered students 
and have been approved for release, will be assessed the cancellation fee.
Cancellation/Refund
Cancellation Before Fall Move–In
If you make the decision not to attend RIT, to commute from your parent/guardian’s home 
within a 30-mile radius of RIT, or move off campus after submitting a housing contract, 
you must cancel your housing contract in writing to Housing Operations.
Cancellation Fee After Move–In
A cancellation fee will be charged to your student account if you remain a registered student 
and move to non–RIT housing after the official move-in day. See RIT Housing Operations 
rate sheet for 2003–2004 for specific amounts.
Refund Policy for Returning Student’s Housing Reservation Fee
If a contract holder submits written notice of cancellation to RIT Housing Operations prior 
to June 15, 2003, the $300 fee will be refunded in full as credit to his/her student account.
Failure of any resident to submit written notice of cancellation to RIT Housing Operations 
by June 15, 2003 shall constitute a forfeiture of the full amount of the reservation fee, 
unless the resident submits proof adequate to RIT that the student has registered in an RIT 
approved co-op or field study instruction program. 
Waived Housing Reservation Fee
If a contract holder had his/her housing reservation fee waived during the Housing 
Selection Process and then cancels his/her fall housing assignment after June 15, 2003, a 
$300 cancellation fee will be placed on the student’s account.
Prorated Refund
Charged on a daily basis through the day the key and Key Return Envelope is returned for 
the following
 Transferring within RIT housing.
  Active military service—a student called to active military service after June 15, 
2003 but before the start of the quarter.
  Academic Suspension—verified in writing from the academic department or the 
Registrar’s Office.
9
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
 Illness—certified by an attending physician, which prohibits attendance.
  Co-op—changes in co-op employment status, verified in writing by the Co-op 
Office or employer.
 Marriage—certified by a marriage certificate.
Partial Refund
Applies for reasons not listed above in the Prorated Refund section. Unused charge is 
determined by the number of weeks in the quarter minus the number of weeks the room 
was occupied.
Refund Schedule
The first week of classes –90% of unused charge is refunded.
 Fall  September 5–11, 2003
 Winter   November 30–December 6, 2003
 Spring  March 7–13, 2004
The second week of classes–75% of unused room charge is refunded.
 Fall  September 12–18, 2003
 Winter  December 7–13, 2003
 Spring  March 14–20, 2004
The third week of classes–60% of unused room chare is refunded.
 Fall  September 19–25, 2003
 Winter  December 14–20, 2003
 Spring  March 21–27, 2004
The fourth week of classes–50% of unused room charge is refunded.
 Fall  September 26–October 2, 2003
 Winter  January 4–10, 2004
 Spring   March 28–April 3, 2004
After the fourth week no refund is given. However, the federal government has required 
that students receiving any Title IV federal funding who are in their first quarter at RIT are 
eligible for prorations through the end of the sixth week of classes if they officially withdraw 
from RIT or take a leave of absence. For further information, you may contact the Bursar’s 
Office.
10
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Housing Guidelines and Expectations
All federal, state, and local laws affecting the town of Henrietta are in effect on the RIT 
campus. Violations of these laws are also violations of RIT policies and can result in arrest 
by outside law enforcement, and in disciplinary action by RIT or both. Failure to comply 
with any authorized personnel will result in disciplinary action by RIT. RIT encourages 
each student to assume the responsibility to protect his or her own individual rights as 
well as rights of others. Any person violating any student’s rights will face appropriate 
disciplinary action including the possibility of arrest.
Community Expectations—For all of RIT Housing
Residents are expected to conduct their behavior to allow for the quiet enjoyment of the 
property and premises that is reasonable for a student housing facility. Conduct which 
infringes upon the rights of others to a quiet, ordinary living environment that supports 
a student’s academic pursuits is not acceptable under any circumstances and is cause for 
disciplinary action which may lead to removal from RIT housing. A resident’s right to sleep 
or study takes precedence over a roommate(s) desire to have guests, watch television, play 
music, etc. in the apartment/room. Denying your roommate(s) access to the apartment/
room or interference with your roommate(s) right to study or to sleep is prohibited.
Violation of any or all established floor/house/apartment quiet hours is prohibited. There 
are mandatory quiet hours for the residence halls each evening that are to be observed 
throughout the academic year. They are 11:00 pm until 7:00 am Sunday through Thursday 
and 1:00 am to 7:00 am Friday and Saturday. Any community may choose to vote on and 
enforce stricter quiet hours. Twenty-four hour courtesy hours are always in effect.  During 
exam week all areas observe 24–hour mandatory quiet hours. 
Any act which violates RIT or housing policies or endangers the health safety, or well 
being of any person is prohibited. Intentionally or recklessly causing physical harm to any 
person, including assault, harassment, or creating a threatening situation is prohibited. 
Sexual, racial, disability, sexual orientation, religious harassment or verbal abuse to others 
is prohibited.
Proselytizing (religious solicitation) is prohibited.
The Center for Residence Life and RIT Housing Operations staff reserve the right to 
remove materials deemed offensive that are facing a public area including but not limited 
to doors and windows.
Providing false information, lying, forgery, or any other types of misrepresentation 
concerning a violation of policy, when questioned by a Residence Life and/or RIT Housing. 
11
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Operations staff member or any other college official, is prohibited.  Failure to comply will 
result in disciplinary action.
Solicitation and/or canvassing of any kind by resident or others, without the prior consent 
of RIT, will not be permitted in/or about the premises. Any money making form of business 
operated from RIT housing is prohibited.
Residents are responsible for cleaning their own apartment/room, removing waste materials 
regularly and maintaining sanitation and safety conditions acceptable to RIT Housing 
Operations. Any cleaning needed to resident’s housing during occupancy or after check 
out that is deemed excessive by RIT Housing Operations and/or Facilities Management will 
result in a charge.  In residence halls, Facilities Management housekeeping staff cleans suite 
bathrooms and all public areas.
The use of skateboards, bikes, roller blades/rollerskates, scooters and/or similar devices 
in any area of housing or tunnel areas are prohibited.  Also, skateboarding is not allowed 
on any stairs inside or outside of housing. Skateboards/rollerblading/etc. is not permitted 
around any of the building perimeters/entranceways/breezeways. Use of such items on 
roadways or walkways requires extreme caution. Pedestrians have the right of way on all 
walkways. 
Entry into unauthorized area (roof, boiler room, storage room, other student apartment/
rooms, Ball Room, etc.) without proper permission from RIT officials is prohibited. 
The denial of access to all public areas, except when they are in use for authorized and 
registered activities, is prohibited.
Theft, vandalism, and damage of property is prohibited. Any damage to your housing will 
result in a minimum charge of $20.00. 
Sports playing is not allowed anywhere inside or outside any RIT housing, lobbies, tunnels, 
hallways on walk ways, in the quads, or grassy areas.  Exception—Frisbee or hackie sack are 
allowed in residence halls quads.  The use of squirt guns are not allowed anywhere inside 
housing including the tunnels. 
RIT Inn: Nothing can be hung, attached, or stored on a balcony.
12
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Guest/Visitation 
Guests are permitted under the following conditions: 
 Resident students have guest privileges.  The following guidelines apply to guests  
 of same sex and opposite sex:
  All overnight guests must be registered by the hosting resident in advance of 
their arrival with the Housing Operations office and/or Center for Residence Life 
using a guest registration form. Copies of this form are available in the Housing 
Operations and Residence Life Offices.
  The form must be completed by the host and signed and agreed to by all others on 
contract for the affected apartment/room. Resident(s) of your apartment/room 
must consent to having your guest(s). Your guest(s) visit may not exceed two 
nights and three days except by special permission from your area office. Guest 
may not move in their belongings.
 Your guest(s) must abide by all RIT terms and conditions.
That you, a host, assume full responsibility for your guest(s) behavior and any charges 
or damages that result from his/her misbehavior. The resident as the host, must strictly 
respect the privacy and right to normal use of the apartment/room by roommate(s). Guest 
may not sleep in any public areas. Visitation of opposite sex on single–sex floors and 
apartments is allowed. 
Apartment–Residents will be held responsible for the conduct of their children and 
spouses, including payment for any damages caused by their behavior. If the behavior of a 
resident’s child, or spouse becomes a nuisance to the community or neighbors in the sole 
judgment of RIT, RIT may terminate the contract.
Fire Safety
The resident shall give immediate notice to RIT of fire, accident, damage, and dangerous or 
defective conditions. The use of candles even if for religious purposes or other open flame 
devices are not permitted in RIT housing. 
The burning of incense and potpourri is prohibited. All torchier style lamps, including but 
not limited to those that use halogen, incandescent, or fluorescent bulbs are prohibited. 
Any style lamp that uses halogen bulb 300 watts or more is likewise prohibited.
Fog machines and similar devices are prohibited.
13
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Extension cords and octopus plug adapters are prohibited. Residents may use a UL listed 
plug strip that has a circuit breaker. No more than one strip can be used per outlet. The 
strip should not pose a tripping hazard.
Setting materials on fire, possession or use of flammable or highly combustible material is 
prohibited.
Refusal to leave a building during a fire alarm, to cooperate with any reasonable request by 
an RIT official or to produce identification upon request is prohibited.  
Students who are disabled must contact RIT Housing Operations, Center for Residence 
Life and Campus Safety if assistance during an emergency/fire alarm is needed.
Students whose mobility becomes impaired during their stay in housing are required to 
notify Housing Operations, Center for Residence Life and Campus Safety, so assistance 
during an emergency can be given if needed.
Any student found guilty of causing an avoidable fire alarm will face judicial action and 
may be charged up to $200.00 restitution.
Apartments—If a fire alarm is determined to have been caused by a dirty stove, the 
resident(s) must clean the stove before using it again or within 24 hours, whichever is 
less. If within 24 hours the stove has not been cleaned, Housing Operations will have 
the cleaning done at the resident(s) expense. Charges for cleaning will be placed on the 
resident(s) student account.  
Falsely reporting a fire, bomb threat, serious injury or any emergency situation is 
prohibited.
Tampering with, altering, or changing any building system (i.e. Safety equipment, lock, 
elevator, fire alarm, fire extinguisher, smoke detector, telephone equipment, TV cable, 
computer cable and/or pathway, plumbing/electrical system, etc.) is prohibited. Strobe 
lights cannot be obstructed by any material or object. Any student found guilty of 
tampering, altering or changing any building system will face judicial action and student 
may also be required to pay restitution.
Fire and smoke doors unless on a magnetic hold need to be closed at all times.
Storage in student apartment/room or floor/house, closet, hallway or basement of any 
flammable liquids, propane tank, fireworks, explosive devices, canned or compressed gases, 
poisons, highly combustible substances, chemicals, etc. is prohibited.  The storage or 
14
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
use of gasoline or electric powered vehicles or engines regardless of their state or 
dismantlement in housing is likewise prohibited.
The Town of Henrietta prohibits the use of kerosene heaters within RIT housing.
The use of exterior fireplaces (chimineas, patio fire pits, etc.) is prohibited. 
HAM radio operation is prohibited because it has the potential to activate the fire alarm 
system.
Material, flags, posters, as well as other flammable materials, if hung in your apartment/
room, should be placed directly against a wall and should not interrupt the operation of the 
smoke detector. Nothing can be attached in any way from or on the ceiling.
Some bedrooms at University Commons are furnished with a switch which, when activated, 
will sound an alarm indicating an emergency within that particular apartment bedroom/ 
unit. If the alarm is falsely activated, residents will face judical action and may be charged 
up to $200.00 restitution.
Residents are also responsible for any guest that falsely activates the alarm.
Deaf/hard of hearing students will be assigned to housing with strobed fire alarms.
Residence Halls and RIT Inn
Cooking meals in student rooms is not allowed. All microwave ovens are prohibited in 
student rooms. Only microwave ovens purchased by RIT Housing Operations can be 
used in public areas. Hot air popcorn poppers, coffee pots and hot pots with automatic 
shutoff are allowed in kitchens and lounges. Appliances that create excessive heat or open-
flame/open-element are prohibited in any area of residence halls and the RIT Inn. This 
includes but is not limited to toasters, toaster ovens, hot plates, heaters, etc. Refrigerators 
are allowed in student rooms but cannot exceed 5 cubic feet.
Violations of the policy related to candles, halogen lamps, torchier–style lamps and 
other fire hazards will result in the item(s) being confiscated and sent home or given to 
Campus Safety. A violation will result in the individual owner facing judicial action and 
or termination of housing contract.
Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide warning devices have been installed in select apartments which have 
15
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
furnaces contained in the unit. The sounding of a carbon monoxide alarm should be taken 
seriously and residents shall immediately vacate the apartment in accordance with RIT 
policy and procedure. Tampering with a carbon monoxide alarm or any other emergency 
equipment will be considered a criminal offense and responsible person(s) will face judicial 
action, restitution charges and/or termination of housing contract. Deaf/hard of hearing 
students residing in a room equipped with a carbon monoxide warning device will be 
provided with a strobe warning system.  Strobe lights and smoke detectors located in 
apartment and/or on the premises cannot be obstructed by any material or object.
Colony Manor Basements
The Town of Henrietta and RIT’s terms and conditions strictly prohibit the use of Colony 
Manor basements for sleeping quarters or the storage of beds, mattresses, bed frames, 
futons and/or hide-a-beds. Violators of this policy, which shall include all co-residents in 
the living unit, will be subject to judicial action which may result in removal from housing.  
Due to the safety risk involved, RIT shall have the right to make random inspections of all 
Colony Manor basements after reasonable notice to residents.
Picnic/Grill Areas in Apartments
Resident(s) agree to keep designated picnic/grill areas clean and free of litter and debris.  In 
addition, resident(s) agree to use grills supplied by RIT in an appropriate manner. Personal 
grills can not be stored in apartments or on balconies and can only be used if located a 
minimum of 10 feet away from the building. Violations of this policy will result in judicial 
action and may include confiscation of the grill at the resdients expense.
Grill use for Residence Hall and RIT Inn
Personal or floor/house grills cannot be used on RIT property. Use of any illegal grill will 
be documented and handled by Housing Operations.  Facilities Management is the only 
authorized distributor of charcoal grills. Reservation forms can be obtained from Housing 
Operations. Grills are reserved, delivered and picked up through Facilities Management.
Insurance
It is recommended that your possessions be covered by an adequate insurance policy.  RIT is 
not directly liable for any damage to your property anywhere on the premises, (i.e. damage 
to clothes in laundry machines, water leaks, fire) or the loss or theft of your property either 
in your room or outside your room. All personal valuables should be identified and 
16
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
labeled. Further information is available from RIT Housing Operations or your family 
insurance agent.
Smoking Regulations
Monroe County requires no smoking in any public area. On non-smoking floors in the 
residence halls and in non–smoking buildings, there is no smoking allowed in either student 
rooms or public areas, including tunnels. Smoking is only allowed in student rooms in the 
residence halls with doors closed and adequate ventilation and where all roommates are 
smokers and /or all roommates give their consent. Smoking is only permitted in apartments 
when all roommates are smokers and/or all roommates give their consent. In the event a 
student(s) chooses to smoke outside an apartment he/she must move away from the door 
and building far enough so smoke does not filter back into the building. In the event a 
resident, after being assigned to a nonsmoking space/roommate in the residence halls or 
apartment, begins to smoke, the resident may be reassigned to another space in housing if 
available, upon the request of any co-resident. Smoking is prohibited in student rooms and 
public areas at the RIT Inn. The RIT Inn is a smoke free building.
Keys
Keys are the property of RIT and must be returned to RIT staff along with a Key Return 
envelope at the end of a resident’s contract. Resident will be charged $35 for each key not 
returned. Any unauthorized duplication or distribution of room keys, exterior door keys, 
RIT keys or master keys is prohibited. Resident agrees not to alter any locks or install 
additional locks without written permission of RIT. Residents must carry their keys at 
all times. Lock your door when you leave your residency. Failure to pick up and sign for 
housing keys does not release a resident from his/her rent responsibility. Residents are held 
responsible for their housing keys. In the event a key is lost, residents will be charged $35 
for a replacement key. A lock change will be initiated automatically as the result of a request 
for a replacement key.
Apartment Maintenance and Care
Resident acknowledges acceptance of the apartment unit in its present condition, agrees 
to maintain the apartment and return it to RIT at the termination of this contract in as 
good condition as when taken, reasonable wear and tear accepted. Resident shall not erect 
any exterior wires, aerials, signs, satellite dishes, etc., about the apartment or the premises.  
Resident shall not lay contact paper on any shelves or wall and agrees to use a minimum of 
small tacks or nails to hang personal effects on walls.  Resident shall not paint or wallpaper 
the apartment or any fixtures without the written consent of RIT. Resident at his/her own 
17
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
expense shall keep the apartment clean and fit for habitation and shall be financially 
responsible for all damage to the apartment including but not limited to walls, floors, 
appliances, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and ventilation systems as a result of 
resident’s neglect or failure to act or that a guest while visiting the resident’s apartment.  
Resident shall deposit all refuse into the large dumpsters located through each apartment 
complex.  Under no circumstances are residents to leave refuse in cartons or otherwise 
outside the dumpsters.  In addition, no garbage can or refuse container of any kind, other 
than those provided by RIT may be placed anywhere outside on the premises.  Resident 
is responsible for picking up any garbage or debris dropped outside the apartment by 
themselves or their guests.  
Renovation and Repair
RIT reserves the right to reassign a resident(s) to other housing in the event there is a 
need to provide for renovation or repair of the apartment/room or the premises.  If RIT 
initiated renovations or repairs become necessary, every effort will be made to minimized 
the inconvenience to the resident(s) and, whenever possible, advance notice will be given to 
the resident(s) as to the nature and time of the work which will be done.  Resident(s) shall 
not withhold payment of housing charges due to renovations or repairs.
Ceiling Tiles in Apartments
Residents are strictly prohibited from affixing any object, allowing any objects, water or any 
other liquids to come in contact with, or painting any ceiling areas. Failure to adhere to this 
regulation will result in disciplinary action.
Utilities—Apartments
Residents are requested to conserve utilities if possible by keeping windows closed and 
lights turned off when not in use. 
Additional services: Local phone services are provided by RIT. Any additional service/
installation related monthly fees and charges are the responsibility of the residents.
The monthly charge for basic standard cable TV service (maximum of one service outlet 
per apartment) is provided by RIT. If resident desires enhanced cable TV service and/or 
any additional service installation, related monthly fees and charges are the responsibility 
of the resident(s). 
Water service is provided by RIT.
Air Conditioners in Apartments
Some RIT apartments include air conditioners. 
18
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Residents may request to install an air conditioner in their apartment by completing an 
air conditioning request form available from the Housing Opperation office. If approved, 
resident(s) acknowledge there will be an additional charge of $100 charged to their student 
account. Any resident that installs an air conditioner without approval will face judical 
action, which may result in removal of the air conditioner and/or termination of housing 
contract.
RIT’s Right of Inspection and Entry
RIT or its agent or representative may enter your apartment/room for reasons of health, 
safety, (i.e. fire alarms, safety inspections) general welfare, to check the condition of 
furnishings, or to make necessary repairs to apartments/rooms and/or apartment/room 
equipment, including ISN or cable TV connections.
A maintenance request by a co-resident of the apartment/room occupied by resident shall 
constitute permission for RIT to enter into the apartment/room.
Resident shall also permit RIT or its agent or employees upon scheduled appointments to 
enter the apartment/room for the purpose of displaying the same to prospective residents 
or purchasers. No such prior appointment shall be necessary if this contract has been 
declared in default or if the resident(s) had abandoned the apartment/room.
Resident agrees that Housing Operations reserves the right to enter into RIT housing for 
emergency reasons without prior notification.
RIT hereby reserves all rights to search any housing, which are provided RIT under New 
York State and Federal laws. No housing will be searched without resident’s permission, 
except by an appropriate legal agent with a warrant or an RIT official having written 
authorization from the Vice President of Student Affairs and/or Vice President of Finance 
and Administration.
Pets/Service Animals
No pets or animals except fish are allowed in RIT housing. Piranhas and Oscars are not 
allowed.  The tank size should be no larger than 10 gallons.  
Any damage caused by a fish tank will be charged to the resident. A student may have a 
certified service animal to assist him/her with the consent of the Disability Coordinator 
and Housing Operations. Students with a service animal must present certification that the 
animal has been trained specifically to help the student, to the Coordinator of Disability 
19
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Services. RIT Housing Operations needs prior notice of the arrival of a student with a 
service animal. Student with service animals will be housed on a first or second floor within 
housing.  A student with a service animal is responsible for taking the animal away from 
housing, parking lots and commonly used walkways to relieve itself.  Any student with a 
service animal is encouraged to live in RIT apartments because the situation tends to be 
easier for the animal and the student.  Service animals must be kept under control at all 
time on campus.  
Windows, Screens and Balconies 
Window screens must remain permanently in place to fulfill their purpose and to avoid 
loss.
Foil and cardboard are prohibited from being placed in windows for fire safety reasons.
Any residents throwing things out of their windows or off balconies will be subject to 
judical action which may involve removal from housing. 
 
No resident may hang laundry or shake rugs from a window or off a balcony.  
Tampering with windows is prohibited.
Furniture
Residents shall not dissemble and/or remove any existing furniture or fixtures from 
residents assigned housing.
Only lofts purchased by RIT are allowed in housing.
No oversized and/or heavy furniture is permitted in any RIT housing. This includes but is 
not limited to all types of lofts, wood structures, bars, etc.
Waterbeds are strictly prohibited.
No structural changes to apartment/room or public areas are allowed including the 
attachment of furniture or wall coverings of any type.
No furniture may be removed from public areas.
Wall shelves are not allowed in RIT housing.
20
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
The use of temporary and/or permanent hot tubs is prohibited in RIT housing or about 
the premises.
Furniture can not be removed from apartments, rooms or common areas to which it has 
been allocated unless authorized by RIT Housing Operations. Unauthorized movement of 
RIT furniture will result in judicial action and a $50.00 mandatory restitution for each piece 
of furniture moved.
Storage Space
No storage is provided to students in any RIT housing. Under no circumstances are utility 
or furnace rooms, entrances, hallways, and lounges to be used for storage. Colony Manor 
basements and townhouse crawl spaces may not be utilized for living or storage space by 
an resident. Summer storage in apartments may be offered under restricted conditions, 
however not guaranteed.
Liability
RIT shall not be liable for any personal injury to any resident or any damage or loss to resident’s 
property, including but not limited to any injury, loss or damage caused by burglary, assault, 
vandalism, theft or any other crimes. All personal property placed or kept in RIT housing or 
in any space or anywhere on the adjacent premises of RIT, shall be at resident’s sole risk and 
RIT shall not be liable for any damages to or loss of, such property.  RIT encourages residents 
to keep their doors locked at all times. Resident is encouraged to secure renters insurance or 
similar coverage to cover any loss or damage to personal property.
Parties–Apartments
Residents shall comply with the fire codes and other ordinances of the Town of Henrietta. 
All private parties must be contained to the inside of one apartment unit and are limited 
to 25 invited guests. Private outdoor lawn, block building parties are strictly prohibited as 
their size frequently creates excessive noise, damage and fire safety hazards as well as the 
risk of personal injury.
All privately sponsored parties must be by direct personal invitation only. General “come 
all” posters, flyers, or mass electronic communication invitations are not permitted.  
Residents who sponsor parties are responsible for all aspects of the party including but not 
limited to behavior of participants and guests, limiting attendance, proper age verification 
21
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
of guests, paying for any damages and insuring that all RIT policies and regulations are 
maintained. Residents who host private parties where alcohol is served or consumed 
assume full responsibility and liability for compliance with the New York State  drinking 
law. Noise from apartment parties must be minimized. Music and noise, which disturbs 
residents of adjacent apartments or sound directed out windows, is prohibited.  Residents 
must take immediate action in response to any complaints received as a result of a party. If 
necessary, residents should enlist the assistance of Campus Safety. No resident or guest of 
resident may charge an entrance fee (commonly known as a “ cover charge” or “donation”) 
from any individual wishing to gain access to a party. Failure to abide by these requirements 
may result in student disciplinary proceedings, administrative removal from the housing 
unit, termination of the contract as well as criminal and/or civil legal action.
Damage
Any damage to RIT housing, other than normal wear and tear, will be charged to the 
responsible resident(s) to the extent they are identifiable. The extent not identifiable, all co-
residents will be jointly and severally liable. RIT losses resulting from resident negligence 
will be evaluated and assessed to the appropriate individual(s). Damage charges will be 
placed on the students account. The resident agrees to immediately reimburse RIT for 
any charges, which are assessed as set forth in this agreement. Should charges be assessed 
and totaled after the expiration of this agreement, they shall constitute a debt payable by 
resident immediately upon demand by RIT.  
Transferring Units
RIT shall not be liable for any personal conflict of resident with co–resident’s guests or 
invitees, or with any other residents that reside at the apartment. Therefore, a conflict 
between residents does not constitute grounds for termination of this contract. RIT 
acknowledges that there may be valid reasons why a request for transfer would be 
considered and approved. Any apartment group desiring a transfer should make a formal 
request to RIT via RIT Housing Operations. The request should include the following 
information: the apartment type desired and the reason for the requested transfer. Space 
permitting, if the request is valid and practical, and an inspection of the current apartment 
unit is satisfactory, resident(s) will be notified of a new assignment. In order to make the 
transfer process from one unit to another run smoothly, the following policy has been 
established. Resident(s) requesting an apartment transfer must comply with the following 
procedures. Request an apartment transfer through RIT Housing Operations. Agree to a 
specific move date. Arrange for an inspection with RIT Housing Operations prior to being 
issued a contract. Agree to pay all housing charges and damage costs.  Outstanding and any 
hidden damages found by RIT are attributable to residents(s).
22
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Pools
At this time a pool policy is being drafted. Until such time that a pool policy is published, 
pools in any housing areas are prohibited. Contact RIT Housing Operations for further 
details.
Parking
Resident and all resident’s guests shall comply with RIT’s parking and traffic regulations 
at all times.  
Driving or parking on lawns, other landscaped areas, and walkways is strictly prohibited.  
 
All vehicles owned by resident shall be properly licensed and registered with RIT.  
Any unlicensed vehicle will be towed and/or stored at its owner’s expense. 
RIT reserves the right to regulate the storage of boats and campers in parking areas.  
Snowmobiles, three-wheelers and minibikes are prohibited on RIT property.
Each apartment complex has designated visitor parking. Visitors staying more than 24 
hours should leave a clearly visible note inside the windshield stating the dates the vehicle 
will be parked at the premises and the apartment number where they can be reached should 
it be necessary to move the vehicle.  
Residents are responsible for moving their vehicles and those of their guest to designated 
areas during snow removal or risk towing and storage fees.
Bedding Guideline in Residence Halls
RIT Housing Operations requests, for safety purposes, only mattresses purchased by the 
department be used.  Students cannot bring their own mattresses unless purchased since 
1990.  
Egg crate mattress pads are not allowed in any residence hall room for safety purposes.
Nothing can be placed on the bed platform except a mattress.
General
The unauthorized duplication of any RIT Housing Operations document is prohibited.
No sign, signal, advertisement, flag, banner or illumination of any kind shall be placed 
23
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
on or out any window or other part of the premises without the written approval of RIT 
Housing Operations.
RIT housing is for residential use only. 
Residents shall not use their housing or any part of RIT premises for any commercial 
business or purpose.
RIT Inn Pool Policy
RIT students can only swim in the indoor/outdoor pool when a lifeguard is on duty. RIT 
students and their guests are expected to follow all of the posted policies related to the pool, 
sauna and whirlpool. 
Alcohol and Drug Regulations
Residents of RIT Housing shall abide by Rochester Institute of Technology policies, 
procedures and regulations and local, state and federal laws regarding alcohol and drugs 
use. Behavior which is dangerous to oneself or others or which disturbs the learning and/or 
living environment at RIT resulting from the use, sale, service or possession of alcohol 
or illegal drugs is prohibited. Violations of the New York State Drug law is prohibited. 
This includes the use, sale or possession of any illegal drug, plant, narcotic or controlled 
substance. Personal use of prescribed drugs only is allowed. The making of alcoholic 
beverages including beer, wine or liquor is prohibited. Drug paraphernalia is not allowed in 
RIT housing. Behavior which is dangerous to oneself or others and/or disturbs the learning 
and/or living environment in RIT operated facilities or at any RIT sponsored activity/event 
is strictly prohibited. Such behavior will result in Campus Safety intervention and campus 
judicial action.
Students violating the RIT Student Alcohol and Drug Policy will be subject to the campus 
judicial process published in the “Student Rights and Responsibilities Handbook”, and 
to the judicial actions and sanctions described in this policy. All guests or visitors to the  
campus must also comply with the provisions of this policy or risk removal from the 
campus and possible future restriction from campus property. 
Residence Halls
The consumption, possession or evidence of alcoholic beverages including empty 
alcohol containers is prohibited in all RIT residence halls (including Greek houses and 
house basements), regardless of age or circumstances. Alcohol may not be illegally used, 
possessed, manufactured or exchanged on RIT owned or operated property or at RIT 
sponsored events. No alcohol may be sold or exchanged for money on RIT property or at   
24
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
RIT sponsored events without a New York State liquor license. The RITskeller will continue 
to be a licensed premise and will be permitted to serve alcohol to individuals who are at 
least 21 years of age.
RIT Inn and Apartments
Alcohol is permitted in RIT Inn and Conference Center and the RIT apartments only if 
residents of the apartment/room are of at least 21 years of age. No alcohol is permitted in 
common or public areas.  Bulk containers of alcohol (kegs, beer balls, or other containers of 
alcohol that exceed a quart or one-liter) are prohibited in all RIT operated housing. Open 
containers of alcohol are not permitted outdoors, on a balcony, or in common or public 
entrances, hallways or stairways.
If, at any time, the resident fails to comply with the term and conditions of this contract, 
RIT may terminate the contract with appropriate notice. the resident shall vacate housing 
within three (3) business days of termination.
Residence Hall Terms of Meal and Debit Plans
Terms of Meal Plans
Meal plan participation is mandatory for all residence hall students. Upon signing a 
residence hall contract, your account is open and you are immediately responsible for all 
meals eaten or debt used and posted against your account. The meal plan schedule follows 
the official Institute calendar. The first meal of the fall quarter is dinner on the first day of 
upperclassmen move–in. The first meal for Winter and Spring Quarters is lunch on the day 
before classes begin. The summer quarter meal plan begins with breakfast on the first day 
of classes. The last meal of each quarter is dinner on the last day of classes or exams, unless 
otherwise noted. Meal plans do not cover meals over the fall/winter break, mid-winter 
quarter holiday break, winter/spring break, spring/summer break, or the summer/fall 
break.
Your debit account is activated upon your arrival. The debit portion of meal plan ends 
with the last meal of each quarter. The Rochester Institute of Technology Food Service 
Department (RITFSD) will activate the following quarter’s debit account so it may be used 
during the quarter breaks in available food service facilities and vending machines.
Unused weekly meals/meal options are non-refundable and non-transferable.
No refunds are made on unused meals/meal options or unused debit which comes with the 
meal plan unless student is released from the residence halls (see refund schedule).
25
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Meal plan choice may be changed during the first week of each academic quarter only.
Terms Of Debit Plans
The terms of the debit account agreement commences when the student’s debit account 
application is accepted by the RITFSD and expires when one of the following occurs 
cancellation by either RITFSD or the account holder; or at the completion of the academic 
year (after the end of spring quarter, unless the account holder notifies Food Service that 
they are attending the summer quarter). All accounts close at the conclusion of the summer 
quarter. A student may request a release from their debit account agreement and may 
receive a refund when released from the residence halls (see refund schedule).
The student debit account holder agrees that RITFSD will debit from the student’s debit 
account the amount of any meals or other RITFSD food items charged against the student’s 
debit account. RITFSD agrees to accept the student’s debit card amount at those food 
service facilities operated by the RITFSD, which accept the debit card system. RITFSD 
agrees to advance to the next quarter within each academic year the unused portion of all 
money deposited into the account by the student. 
The student may verify an account balance at the main Food Service Office, with the cashier 
at any Food Service facility, or the Bursar’s Office. A statement of account is available upon 
request at the main Food Service Office or Bursar/Cashier’s Offices.
Account holders will not be required to pay sales tax, thus paying 8% less than a cash paying 
customer. (Note: Some non-food items are exempt from all discounting and require the 
collection of sales tax. The purchase of all alcoholic beverages and tobacco products with 
your debit account is prohibited).
Deposits may be made in person Monday through Friday, between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
at the main Food Service Office located in the basement of the Student Alumni Union 
building (Room A-520), or at the Bursar’s Office, located on the first floor of the Eastman 
Building during business hours. 
Deposit forms may also be obtained and deposited with the cashier located at any Food 
Service facility for next business day deposit. You can also phone your deposit into the food 
service office, at 475–2228 (v.tty) or toll free at 1–800–724–5104, with Visa or MasterCard 
purchase. In addition, deposits can be made online at ipay.rit.edu.
Lost or damaged cards must be replaced to maintain access and service. These replacements 
will be made in accordance with current policies regarding card replacement and the 
student will have to pay the appropriate card replacement fee.
26
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Each student is responsible for safeguarding his/her debit/meal card. Should a card 
become lost, either accidentally or by theft, RIT and RITFSD assume no responsibility for 
unauthorized withdrawals from the student’s account prior to the member notifying the 
RITFSD Meal Ticket Offices of the loss by calling either 475-2228 (V/TDD), or 475-2500 
during their posted operating hours.  
Campus Safety can also be notified of a lost card 24 hours a day at 475-2853. Upon being 
notified of the lost card, the Meal Ticket Office or Campus Safety will electronically 
deactivate the lost card, thereby preventing its future use.
The student account holders on the “Any-Plus” or All Debit meal plans understand that 
they will receive a quarterly balance appropriate to their selected plan deposited into their 
accounts by RITFSD. This amount, if not used quarterly, will be returned to RITFSD.
Debit balances on a food plan account cannot be transferred to the Flexible Spending 
Account. (Flexible Spending is a declining balance, taxable debit program used to purchase 
non-food items in other campus retail outlets).
The student understands that the debit account/meal ticket is to be used by him/herself, and 
is non-transferable. The card will be confiscated if found being used by an unauthorized 
individual.
Terms Of Straight Debit
Any monies deposited over and above your meal plan or Debit Plan is considered Straight 
Debit. This is the student’s money and the unused portion will advance each quarter until 
the last quarter of the academic year. If not used, these funds will revert to RITFSD and is 
non-refundable.
The Straight Debit account holders will not be required to pay the 8% sales tax on their 
food purchases, making the unused portions of this account non-refundable.
A student may request a release from their straight debit account agreement and RITFSD 
will refund their remaining balance, less an 8% sales tax assessment on the unused portion 
for this quarter. In addition, a 5% processing charge will be deducted from your refund.
A release may be granted for the following circumstances
Withdrawal from school (graduation does not constitute withdrawal).
Academic or disciplinary dismissal.
27
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Refund Schedule
When released from the residence halls, you may receive a partial refund on your meal/
debit plan in accordance with the following schedule. An 8% sales tax will be assessed to the 
used portion of your quarterly plan charge. This will be deducted from your refund.
Within the first four weeks, 75% of the unused meal/debit charges is refunded.
After the fourth week, 50% of the unused meal/debit charges is refunded.
During the last two weeks of classes, no refund is given. 
By signing the residence hall contract and this agreement, the student meal plan and debit 
account holder agrees to abide by all policies, rules, regulations and procedures of the Food 
Service Department. 
RIT Inn Terms of Meal and Debt Plans
Terms Of Meal Plans
Meal plan participation is mandatory for all RIT Inn students. Upon signing an RIT Inn 
contract, your account is open and you are immediately responsible for all meals eaten or 
debt used and posted against your account.
The meal plan schedule follows the official Institute calendar. The first meal of the fall 
quarter is dinner on the first day of upperclassmen move–in. The first meal for winter and 
spring quarters is lunch on the day before classes begin. The summer quarter meal plan 
begins with breakfast on the first day of classes. The last meal of each quarter is dinner on 
the last day of classes or exams, unless otherwise noted.
Meal plans do not cover meals over the fall/winter break, mid-winter quarter holiday break, 
winter/spring break, spring/summer break, or the summer/fall break.
Your debit account is activated upon your arrival.  The debit portion of meal plan ends 
with the last meal of each quarter. The Rochester Institute of Technology Food Service 
Department (RITFSD) will activate the following quarter’s debit account so it may be used 
during the quarter breaks in available food service facilities and vending machines.
Unused weekly meals/meal options are non-refundable and non-transferable.
No refunds are made on unused meals/meal options or unused debit which comes with 
28
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
the meal plan unless student is released from the RIT Inn (see refund schedule).
Meal plan choice may be changed during the first week of each academic quarter only.
Terms Of Debit Plans
The terms of the debit account agreement commences when the student’s debit account 
application is accepted by the RITFSD and expires when one of the following occurs
 cancellation by either RITFSD or the account holder; or
  at the completion of the academic year (after the end of spring quarter, unless 
the account holder notifies Food Service that they are attending the summer 
quarter).  All accounts close at the conclusion of the summer quarter.
A student may request a release from their debit account agreement and may receive a 
refund when released from the RIT Inn (see refund schedule).
The student debit account holder agrees that RITFSD will debit from the student’s debit 
account the amount of any meals or other RITFSD food items charged against the student’s 
debit account.  RITFSD agrees to accept the student’s debit card amount at those food 
service facilities operated by the RITFSD, which accept the debit card system.  RITFSD 
agrees to advance to the next quarter within each academic year the unused portion of 
all money deposited into the account by the student.  The student may verify an account 
balance at the main Food Service Office, with the cashier at any Food Service facility, or the 
Bursar’s Office.  A statement of account is available upon request at the main Food Service 
Office or Bursar/Cashier’s Offices.
Account holders will not be required to pay sales tax, thus paying 8% less than a cash paying 
customer.  (Note: Some non-food items are exempt from all discounting and require the 
collection of sales tax.  The purchase of all alcoholic beverages and tobacco products with 
your debit account is prohibited).
Deposits may be made in person Monday through Friday, between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. at 
the main Food Service Office located in the basement of the Student Alumni Union building 
(Room A-520), or at the Bursar’s Office, located on the first floor of the Eastman Building 
during business hours.  Deposit forms may also be obtained and deposited with the cashier 
located at any Food Service facility for next business day deposit. You can also phone your 
deposit into the food service office, at 475–2228 (v.tty) or toll free at 1–800–724–5104, with 
Visa or MasterCard purchase. In addition, deposits can be made online at ipay.rit.edu.
Lost or damaged cards must be replaced to maintain access and service.  These replacements 
will be made in accordance with current policies regarding card replacement and the 
student will have to pay the appropriate card replacement fee.
29
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Each student is responsible for safeguarding his/her debit/meal card.  Should a card 
become lost, either accidentally or by theft, RIT and RITFSD assume no responsibility for 
unauthorized withdrawals from the student’s account prior to the member notifying the 
RITFSD Meal Ticket Offices of the loss by calling either 475-2228 (V/TDD), or 475-2500 
during their posted operating hours.  Campus Safety can also be notified of a lost card 24 
hours a day at 475-2853.  Upon being notified of the lost card, the Meal Ticket Office or 
Campus Safety will electronically deactivate the lost card, thereby preventing its future use. 
The student account holders on the “Any-Plus” or All Debit meal plans understand that 
they will receive a quarterly balance appropriate to their selected plan deposited into their 
accounts by RITFSD.  This amount, if not used quarterly, will be returned to RITFSD.
The student account holders on the “Any-Plus” or All Debit meal plans understand that 
they will receive a quarterly balance appropriate to their selected plan deposited into their 
accounts by RITFSD.  This amount, if not used quarterly, will be returned to RITFSD.
Debit balances on a food plan account cannot be transferred to the Flexible Spending 
account.  (Flexible Spending is a declining balance, taxable debit program used to purchase 
non-food items in other campus retail outlets).
The student understands that the debit account/meal ticket is to be used by him/herself, and 
is non-transferable. The card will be confiscated if found being used by an unauthorized 
individual.
Terms Of Straight Debit
Any monies deposited over and above your meal plan or debit plan is considered Straight 
Debit. This is the student’s money and the unused portion will advance each quarter until 
the last quarter of the academic year. If not used, these funds will revert to RITFSD and is 
non-refundable.
The Straight Debit account holders will not be required to pay the 8% sales tax on their 
food purchases, making the unused portions of this account non-refundable.
A student may request a release from their straight debit account agreement and RITFSD 
will refund their remaining balance, less an 8% sales tax assessment on the unused portion 
for this quarter.  In addition, a 5% processing charge will be deducted from your refund.
A release may be granted for the following circumstances
Withdrawal from school (graduation does not constitute withdrawal).
Academic or disciplinary dismissal.
30
Rochester Institute of Technology Terms and Conditions
Refund Schedule
When released from the RIT Inn, you may receive a partial refund on your meal/debit plan 
in accordance with the following schedule. An 8% sales tax will be assessed to the used 
portion of your quarterly plan charge.This will be deducted from your refund.
Within the first four weeks, 75% of the unused meal/debit charges is refunded.
After the fourth week, 50% of the unused meal/debit charges is refunded.
During the last two weeks of classes, no refund is given. 
By signing the RIT Inn contract and this agreement, the student meal plan and debit 
account holder agrees to abide by all policies, rules, regulations and procedures of the Food 
Service Department. 
31
RIT Housing Operations
63 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, New York 14623
585–475–2572 (voice)
585–475–2113 (tty)
http://finweb.rit.edu/housing
housing@rit.edu
